C/ivilizations are often defined by the lives and works of their
creative geniuses. The glory that was ancient Greece was built on the
achievements of Homer, Pythagoras, Herodotus, Sophocles, Plato, Hippocrates, Phidias, and hundreds of other great creators. Modern European
civilization was illuminated by the likes of Galileo, Descartes, Tolstoy, Rembrandt, and Mozart. The same story may be told of the world's other civilizations. The histories of Persia, India, China, and other high cultures are to
a very large extent chronologically arranged biographies of notable creative
minds. As Thomas Carlyle proclaimed in his famous 1841 essay On Heroes,
"Universal History, the history of what man has accomplished in this world,
is at bottom the History of the Great Men who have worked here." Among
those he discussed at length as illustrations were Dante and Shakespeare,
two of the greatest writers in any language.
So obvious is the debt civilizations owe these exceptional individuals that
the appearance of such geniuses is often considered an indication of the creative health of a civilized culture. For example, this linking is evident in the
1944 Configurations of Culture Growth by Alfred Kroeber, an eminent cultural anthropologist. Wishing to gauge the emergence, growth, and stagnation of civilizations throughout the world, Kroeber could conceive of no
better method than to assess the appearance of famous creators across a culture's history. A civilization enjoyed a golden age when it overflowed with
~i
1
2 ~ Origins of Genius ~
first-rate creative minds, experienced a silver age when the creative activity
descended to a less notable level, and suffered a dark age when creators
became few and far between. Indeed, this association goes beyond the
abstract operational definitions of behavioral scientists. What nation does
not take pride when one of its writers or scientists is awarded the Nobel
Prize?
Yet who are these creative luminaries? Where do they come from? When
do they appear? What are they like? Can any one of us become a creative
genius? Or is high-caliber creativity limited to the one in a million?
These questions are important. In fact, they provide the impetus behind
my writing this book. But before I can even begin to address these issues, I
must first define what we will take to mean "creative genius."
Creative Genius
Actually, I need to define two distinct even if overlapping terms: genius
and creativity. I will begin with a look at the multiple ways that genius can
be defined, identifying the definition that will prove most useful in this
book. I will then turn to the task of defining creativity, another concept that
can be defined in more than one way. By merging these definitions, we end
up with the book's subject matter.
Genius
The word genius has a curious etymology. It dates from Roman times,
when the word signified the guardian spirit of a particular individual or
location. Because this spirit provided for the distinctiveness or uniqueness
of the entity with which it was identified, it came to represent that which
was special about the person, place, period, or other entity. Thus, we could
speak of the "genius" of a culture or era or even people, such as the genius of
Native American culture, the genius of the Elizabethan age, or the genius of
the Arabic language. With respect to individuals, the term genius became
descriptive of some natural talent, ability, or disposition, especially when it
goes well beyond the norm. Hence, a person might have a genius for making
the most apt remarks in socially difficult situations. In the extreme case, an
individual might achieve fame for the realization of this special talent. As a
consequence, famous composers, artists, writers, and scientists began to be
called geniuses. Beethoven was a musical genius, Shakespeare a dramatic
genius, Michelangelo an artistic genius, Newton a scientific genius, and so
forth. Because the successful exercise of these special aptitudes seemed to
imply an extraordinary degree of intellect or talent, the word genius also
began to be used in the more generic fashion favored today—as someone
who exhibits exceptional intellectual or creative power. The specific applica-
~ Genius and Darwin ~ 3
tion of this power was less important than the possession of the capacity. It
is for this reason that Samuel Johnson, the author of the first English dictionary, could claim that "the true Genius is a mind of large general powers,
accidentally determined to some particular direction."
Behavioral scientists have recognized the significance of the term genius
by attempting to provide it with a more exact meaning. If the concept has
any scientific content, it should be possible to devise quantitative measures
to evaluate it. These measures may then be used to gauge the magnitude of
genius an individual can claim, or at least to identify those who most
deserve the appellation. Such measures are of two kinds, namely, those who
attempt to assess intelligence and those who try to estimate eminence.
Intelligence. At the beginning of this century, psychologists tried to build
a more precise definition on the more generic meaning suggested by
Samuel Johnson. This new conception was founded on the intelligence test.
Alfred Binet had already devised a measure of intellectual ability, which
others transformed into a measure of IQ, the intelligence quotient. People
with average powers received scores of 100, and scores lower or higher than
this baseline figure indicated whether an individual was below or above
average in intellectual ability. Eventually, a number of psychologists, such as
Lewis Terman at Stanford University and Leta Hollingworth at Columbia
University, began identifying children as "geniuses" who obtained exceptionally high scores on these tests. The exact cutoff would vary from
researcher to researcher, although it seems that the threshold IQ ranged
somewhere between 130 and 140. The basic assumption was that someone
with an IQ in this range or higher could boast the "mind of large general
powers" that might be channeled successfully into almost any activity.
This high-IQ definition of genius became very popular not only among
psychologists but among the general public besides. Parents of high-IQ
children would learn to call their offspring "geniuses." There even exists a
society named Mensa that consists solely of "geniuses" who have scored a
bit better than 130 on some standard IQ test. Even so, this psychometric
definition leaves much to be desired. As will become apparent later in this
book, a high IQ by no means ensures that an individual will display any special talent or achievement beyond the rather restricted ability to score high
on standardized tests. For instance, the Guinness Book of Records notes that
Marilyn vos Savant holds the record with an IQ of 228, and yet she does not
have the kind of accomplishments to her credit that we might predict from
such an exceptional intellect. Rather than discovering the cure for cancer or
even making a better mousetrap, her achievements thus far have been limited to writing the weekly column "Ask Marilyn," in which she responds to
readers' questions that supposedly only a real brain can answer.
Even worse, those with accomplishments worthy of the designation
4 ~ Origins of Genius ~
"genius" do not always make the IQ cut. When Terman first used the IQ test
to select a sample of child geniuses, he unknowingly excluded a special child
whose IQ did not make the grade. Yet a few decades later that overlooked
talent received the Nobel Prize in physics: William Shockley, the cocreator
of the transistor. Ironically, not one of the more than 1,500 children who
qualified according to his IQ criterion received so high an honor as adults.
Clearly, a Nobel laureate has much greater claim to the term genius than
those whose achievements did not win them such applause.
Eminence. The last statement brings us to an alternative definition—the
one preferred for use throughout this book. This particular definition's origins go back over a century, to Francis Galton, whose 1869 classic, Hereditary Genius, defined genius in terms of enduring reputation. By this Galton
meant "the opinion of contemporaries, revised by posterity... the reputation of a leader of opinion, of an originator, of a man to whom the world
deliberately acknowledges itself largely indebted." Certainly, those men and
women who receive Nobel Prizes are honored for this very reason. When
Niels Bohr received the Nobel Prize for physics, when Marie Curie received
one for chemistry, when Ivan Pavlov received one for medicine and physiology, and when Toni Morrison received one for literature, they were being
acknowledged for their notable contributions to their respective domains,
and hence to human culture as a whole.
The only qualification that we must impose on this attribution is that, as
Galton noted, the "opinion of contemporaries" must be "revised by posterity." There do exist occasions when contemporary judgment errs according
to the retrospective assessment of subsequent generations. Banting and
Macleod, for example, shared a 1923 Nobel Prize for figuring out a way to
isolate insulin, yet now the credit is given to Banting and his laboratory
assistant Best, the original role of Macleod now being considered minimal
at best. Nonetheless, empirical studies have amply demonstrated that there
exists a strong consensus linking the judgments of contemporaries with the
evaluations of posterity. Those who were most famous in their own times
tend to be the most eminent decades, even centuries, later. Hence, Dante
was being overly pessimistic when he claimed that "worldly renown is
naught but a breath of wind, which now comes this way and now comes
that, and changes name because it changes quarter." In fact, eminence relies
not only on transhistorical stability but on cross-cultural consensus besides.
Individual differences in distinction cut across national boundaries and
transcend subcultures within nations. For example, differential fame of
African Americans within that minority culture correlates very highly with
the differential fame of those same luminaries within the majority European American culture.
This eminence definition of genius has four major advantages. First, it
~ Genius and Darwin ~ 5
automatically avoids the problem of the so-called unrecognized genius. If
an individual commands no reputation, and thus is unrecognized, then it is
not possible for him or her to claim status as a genius. Indeed, the phrase
unrecognized genius becomes an oxymoron. Second, the eminence definition comes closer to what genius means in everyday language. The word is
commonly used to refer to those individuals whose impact on history is
most widely recognized as broad and enduring. Third, this definition captures something of the notion of uniqueness that is present in the word's
etymology. People do not claim fame because they do what everyone else
does. On the contrary, they attain distinction because they accomplish that
which sets them apart from the crowd. Every first-rate genius is necessarily
sui generis. Fourth, because eminence varies immensely from person to person, the current definition allows us to speak of degrees of genius. For
instance, the place of Beethoven in the history of European music amply
exceeds that of his contemporary Anton Reicha. On that basis we can style
Beethoven the superior genius. Only Bach and Mozart have reputations that
rival Beethoven's in the world of classical music.
Of course, no definition is perfect. Fame is at times capricious. Eminence
is sometimes bestowed without complete regard to actual achievement. As
Shakespeare once put it, "some are born great, some achieve greatness, and
some have greatness thrust upon 'em." Even so, the connection between
overt accomplishments and ultimate distinction is not so whimsical as to
render this operational definition invalid. It will be sufficient for our purposes to concur with Thomas Carlyle when he noted that "fame, we may
understand, is no sure test of merit, but only a probability of such." That
probability is especially high when we deal with those who attain distinction for creativity.
Creativity
Another contemporary of Beethoven, Napoleon, also earned the title of
genius, in his case military genius. Indeed, by the eminence definition,
Napoleon's genius may have far exceeded that of Beethoven. Winning decisive battles probably has far more impact than writing popular symphonies.
However, in this book our interest will be in genius associated with creativity rather than that associated with leadership. This imposes the need to
define what counts as creativity. Fortunately, this is a somewhat easier task.
Psychologists have reached the conclusion that creativity must entail the
following two separate components.
First, a creative idea or product must be original. Producing exact copies
of someone else's paintings, or reproducing verbatim quotes from other
people's poetry, or repeating scientific theories that others have already presented before the world—none of this can be considered original. Hence,